README.md, before:

# Group16 - Comparative analysis between OS161 and Xv6 operating systems

## Team members

- Baracco Thomas, s308722
- Masciari Luca, s317624
- Valeriano Carlos Gerardo, s308747

## Xv6 Operating System Installation Guide

This guide provides step-by-step instructions for installing the Xv6 operating system on Ubuntu and MacOS (Silicon).

Before you begin, make sure you have the following prerequisites installed on your system:

### Ubuntu prerequisites

1. First, clone the repository for the RISC-V GNU Compiler Toolchain:

   ```bash
   git clone https://github.com/riscv/riscv-gnu-toolchain
   ```

2. Next, make sure you have the packages needed to compile the toolchain:

   ```bash
    sudo apt-get install autoconf automake autotools-dev curl libmpc-dev libmpfr-dev libgmp-dev gawk build-essential bison flex texinfo gperf libtool patchutils bc zlib1g-dev libexpat-dev python3 python3-pip ninja-build cmake libglib2.0-dev
   ```

3. Configure and build the toolchain:

   ```bash
    $ cd riscv-gnu-toolchain
    $ ./configure --prefix=/usr/local
    $ sudo make
    $ cd ..
   ```

4. Download and install qemu

   ```bash
   wget https://download.qemu.org/qemu-8.2.0.tar.xz
   tar xvJf qemu-8.2.0.tar.xz
   cd qemu-8.2.0
   ./configure --disable-kvm --disable-werror --prefix=/usr/local --target-list="riscv64-softmmu"
   make
   sudo make install
   ```

### MacOS (silicon) prerequisites

1. Open a terminal

2. Install Homebrew:

   ```bash
   /bin/bash -c "$(curl -fsSL https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Homebrew/install/HEAD/install.sh)"
   ```

3. Install XCode developer tools:

   ```bash
   xcode-select --install
   ```

4. Install the RISC-V compiler toolchain with Homebrew (arch -arm64):

   ```bash
   brew tap riscv/riscv;
   brew install riscv-tools
   ```

5. Install qemu:

   ```bash
   brew install qemu
   ```

6. Add the following line in the .zshrc file:

   ```text
   export PATH="$PATH:/usr/local/opt/riscv-gnu-toolchain/bin"
   ```

7. Download the qemu-5.1.0 and unzip the downloaded .tar.xz file:

   ```bash
   wget https://download.qemu.org/qemu-5.1.0.tar.xz
   ```

8. Two patches are needed:

   - [PATCH 1](https://patchwork.kernel.org/project/qemu-devel/patch/20210103145055.11074-1-r.bolshakov@yadro.com/) - Create a folder called 'patch' at the same level of the 'qemu-5.1.0' directory and download the .patch file (by clicking the 'mbox' button in the top-right corner of the page at the given link) inside that folder. Then run this from the qemu directory:

     ```bash
     patch -p1 < ../patch/v2-tcg-Fix-execution-on-Apple-Silicon.patch
     ```

   - [PATCH 2](https://gist.github.com/stefannilsson/8a083e07f4103af2520e87fdb1f50efc/revisions) - Find the file util/osdep.c in the 'qemu-5.1.0' directory and add the two lines as shown in the given link.

9. Then run configure with the following command from the qemu directory (some packages might be missing so just use brew to install them if that is the case):

   ```bash
   ./configure --disable-kvm --disable-werror --prefix=/usr/local --target-list="riscv64-softmmu"
   ```

10. And complete the installation with:

    ```bash
    make;
    make install
    ```

### Clone the Xv6 Repository

1. Open a terminal.

2. Clone the Xv6 repository using Git:

   ```bash
   git clone https://github.com/mit-pdos/xv6-riscv.git
   cd xv6-riscv
   ```

### Build and run Xv6

1. Build Xv6:

   ```bash
   make
   ```

2. Run Xv6 using QEMU:

   ```bash
   make qemu
   ```

This command will launch QEMU, and you should see the Xv6 shell.

To exit QEMU you can enter `ctrl+a` and then `x`.

### Cleanup

To clean up the Xv6 build files, you can use:

```bash
make clean
```

### Credits

Tutorial guides used to put together this documentation:

- https://pdos.csail.mit.edu/6.828/2019/tools.html
- https://www.qemu.org/download/#source
- https://github.com/BASARANOMO/xv6-labs-2020/issues/1

## Xv6 Project

### Part 1: Syscalls implementation

#### Task 1: Implementing the waitx syscall

The objective of this task is to enhance the functionalities of the Xv6 OS by implementing a new system call by providing additional information about the waiting and running times of a process. To achieve this, modifications need to be made to the `proc` structure in the kernel, and a new system call `waitx` has to be implemented.

### Part 2:

### Part 3:

Commit message:

Increase maximum file size in xv6

README.md, after:

# Group16 - Comparative analysis between OS161 and Xv6 operating systems

## Team members

- Baracco Thomas, s308722
- Masciari Luca, s317624
- Valeriano Carlos Gerardo, s308747

## Xv6 Operating System Installation Guide

This guide provides step-by-step instructions for installing the Xv6 operating system on Ubuntu and MacOS (Silicon).

Before you begin, make sure you have the following prerequisites installed on your system:

### Ubuntu prerequisites

1. First, clone the repository for the RISC-V GNU Compiler Toolchain:

   ```bash
   git clone https://github.com/riscv/riscv-gnu-toolchain
   ```

2. Next, make sure you have the packages needed to compile the toolchain:

   ```bash
    sudo apt-get install autoconf automake autotools-dev curl libmpc-dev libmpfr-dev libgmp-dev gawk build-essential bison flex texinfo gperf libtool patchutils bc zlib1g-dev libexpat-dev python3 python3-pip ninja-build cmake libglib2.0-dev
   ```

3. Configure and build the toolchain:

   ```bash
    $ cd riscv-gnu-toolchain
    $ ./configure --prefix=/usr/local
    $ sudo make
    $ cd ..
   ```

4. Download and install qemu

   ```bash
   wget https://download.qemu.org/qemu-8.2.0.tar.xz
   tar xvJf qemu-8.2.0.tar.xz
   cd qemu-8.2.0
   ./configure --disable-kvm --disable-werror --prefix=/usr/local --target-list="riscv64-softmmu"
   make
   sudo make install
   ```

### MacOS (silicon) prerequisites

1. Open a terminal

2. Install Homebrew:

   ```bash
   /bin/bash -c "$(curl -fsSL https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Homebrew/install/HEAD/install.sh)"
   ```

3. Install XCode developer tools:

   ```bash
   xcode-select --install
   ```

4. Install the RISC-V compiler toolchain with Homebrew (arch -arm64):

   ```bash
   brew tap riscv/riscv;
   brew install riscv-tools
   ```

5. Install qemu:

   ```bash
   brew install qemu
   ```

6. Add the following line in the .zshrc file:

   ```text
   export PATH="$PATH:/usr/local/opt/riscv-gnu-toolchain/bin"
   ```

7. Download the qemu-5.1.0 and unzip the downloaded .tar.xz file:

   ```bash
   wget https://download.qemu.org/qemu-5.1.0.tar.xz
   ```

8. Two patches are needed:

   - [PATCH 1](https://patchwork.kernel.org/project/qemu-devel/patch/20210103145055.11074-1-r.bolshakov@yadro.com/) - Create a folder called 'patch' at the same level of the 'qemu-5.1.0' directory and download the .patch file (by clicking the 'mbox' button in the top-right corner of the page at the given link) inside that folder. Then run this from the qemu directory:

     ```bash
     patch -p1 < ../patch/v2-tcg-Fix-execution-on-Apple-Silicon.patch
     ```

   - [PATCH 2](https://gist.github.com/stefannilsson/8a083e07f4103af2520e87fdb1f50efc/revisions) - Find the file util/osdep.c in the 'qemu-5.1.0' directory and add the two lines as shown in the given link.

9. Then run configure with the following command from the qemu directory (some packages might be missing so just use brew to install them if that is the case):

   ```bash
   ./configure --disable-kvm --disable-werror --prefix=/usr/local --target-list="riscv64-softmmu"
   ```

10. And complete the installation with:

    ```bash
    make;
    make install
    ```

### Clone the Xv6 Repository

1. Open a terminal.

2. Clone the Xv6 repository using Git:

   ```bash
   git clone https://github.com/mit-pdos/xv6-riscv.git
   cd xv6-riscv
   ```

### Build and run Xv6

1. Build Xv6:

   ```bash
   make
   ```

2. Run Xv6 using QEMU:

   ```bash
   make qemu
   ```

This command will launch QEMU, and you should see the Xv6 shell.

To exit QEMU you can enter `ctrl+a` and then `x`.

### Cleanup

To clean up the Xv6 build files, you can use:

```bash
make clean
```

### Credits

Tutorial guides used to put together this documentation:

- https://pdos.csail.mit.edu/6.828/2019/tools.html
- https://www.qemu.org/download/#source
- https://github.com/BASARANOMO/xv6-labs-2020/issues/1

## Xv6 Project

### Part 1: Syscalls implementation

#### Task 1: Implementing the waitx syscall

The objective of this task is to enhance the functionalities of the Xv6 OS by implementing a new system call by providing additional information about the waiting and running times of a process. To achieve this, modifications need to be made to the `proc` structure in the kernel, and a new system call `waitx` has to be implemented.

### Part 2:

### Part 3: File System

#### Task: Increasing of the maximum size of a xv6 file

The objective of this task is to increase the maximum size of an xv6 file. Currently xv6 files are limited to 268 blocks, or 268*BSIZE bytes (BSIZE is 1024 in xv6). This limit comes from the fact that an xv6 inode contains 12 "direct" block numbers and one "singly-indirect" block number, which refers to a block that holds up to 256 more block numbers, for a total of 12+256=268 blocks.
